Israel says its troops have entered
Southern gaza's largest city the
military says its forces have reached
the center of hunas with other soldiers
surrounding it Israel commanders say
their troops are engaged in some of the
most intense fighting so far Israel says
its aim is to eliminate Hamas hundreds
of thousands of people have been told to
evacuate to humanitarian zones but the
UN says nowhere in Gaza is
safe survivors sift through the rubble
of a destroyer home struck by Israeli
missiles in the early hours of the
morning there were 30 people inside the
house 20 of them were
children we don't know what happened to
us the fire hit and all of it collapsed
on top of us none of us made it out
completely okay everyone is
hurt the United Nations says almost 1.9
million gazans have fled their homes
since the War Began many wound up here
in hanun
now gaza's second largest city is a
Battleground Israel says it is operating
against Hamas strongholds in the South
and both sides report that the fighting
is
fierce leaving civilians with nowhere to
go all
my senior colleagues have been very
clear including the Secretary General
saying there is no there is no there are
no safe places in Gaza the main hospital
in Han yunas is is
overwhelmed the UN says delivering vital
aid supplies is impossible amid the
fighting and still the injured keep
coming as do the
bodies the devastation in Han yunas has
left many Palestinians with a sense that
the world has abandoned
them we need someone to stand by our
side we need someone to find us a
solution we are
devastated but despite a brief ceasefire
between Israel and Hamas the renewed
fighting is as intense as
ever Lynn Hastings is the United Nations
humanitarian coordinator for the
Palestinian territories with Israel
pushing its offensive further south and
so many civilians there whom they expect
to move again I asked if that is
reasonable no and I think we've been
very very clear on that there is really
no safe place to go and Gaza currently
the offens of inhan Unice is pushing
people further to the southeast into a
very very very small portion of Gaza um
of course this is presenting real
problems for us in terms of just
logistically moving around with such a
packed population in such a small area
humanitarian groups have time and again
criticized these so-called safe zones as
not being sufficient is there some way
the un uh could or should assist in
setting up these safe
zones yeah again we've been very clear
uh to the extent that all of the
executive directors of humanitarian
agencies have indicated that we will not
participate in the establishment of safe
zones unless very very specific
conditions are met the first of those of
course is there actually has to be an
agreement between Waring parties the un
unfortunately has experience in what are
called safe zones and of course our
determination has been that they are in
fact not safe zones in addition to there
needing to be an agreement people need
to be able to move in and out freely in
addition the United Nations and its
humanitarian Partners must be able to
deliver to people who are not in the
safe Zone we need to be able to deliver
to communities that are hosting idps
some families are hosting maybe 60
people in their own homes that's not
necessarily in the safe zone so again we
will not participate in the
establishment of safe zones unless
specific conditions are met so the zones
obviously need to be safe not just for
the civilians but your people too uh do
tell us about the conditions right now
in hunas which is coming under heavy
bombardment and
fighting yes so it's exactly as you say
it's heavy bombardment we have reports
from some of our own staff who are in
these so-called deconflict boxes the
government of Israel issued a map over
the past couple of days indicating which
areas might be hit and which not but
even those people who are living trying
to live in the uh zones that have been
indicated to be safe are also coming
under Fire and that's why everybody's
moving into ever smaller uh parts of
Gaza and of course I'm sure your
listeners um can understand that the
more people that are pushed into small
small spaces without proper hygiene
sanitation access to water access to
food it's really just a Public Health
crisis
unfolding what sort of possibility is
there at the moment of getting more food
and Medicine into uh help those
people yeah so um there's been a lot of
activity obviously on social media
lately and there is one hashtag that the
government of Israel has put out which
is basically saying hashtag uh United
Nations to keep up I just want to make
it very clear to everybody that the
United Nations continues to Define
Israel as the occupying power they have
control over the sea land and air space
um this makes them the occupying power
this actually means that they are
responsible to ensure that we can
deliver um and in fact they are
responsible for providing assistance to
people who are in need uh so I wanted to
make that very clear um as we have to
the government of Israel and in addition
to that that we need commercial trucks
and openings to start again right now we
are being asked to deliver humanitarian
assistance bringing in very very large
trucks with all of our Commodities
through what is a
pedestrian Crossing we need the
commercial Crossings to be reopened
nowhere in the world does the United
Nations support an entire population we
always work with partners that includes
public sector and the commercial sectors
one of those uh commercial Crossings
you're talking about is in the South
controlled uh by Israel in this case uh
unlike the Rafa Crossing but there are
also Israeli soldiers station there so I
mean it sounds like an
impossibility in fact today the
government of Israel informed us that we
would be able to use that Crossing for
verification or rather I should should
say they would be able to use that
Crossing for verification because
currently the Israelis are verifying
what's inside of trucks inspecting
basically what side what's inside of
trucks to make sure that they um the
Commodities can go in safely in line
with the government of Israel or the
israeli's uh security needs so now
that's going to be moved up from about
an hour and a half south of Gaza and we
will be able to start using
that Crossing as I say the Israelis will
be doing their verification processes
there and then we will be moving the
trucks around the corner so to speak uh
and through Rafa which sorry it's in
Egypt sure any more breakthroughs when
it comes to uh or any progress at all
when it comes to delivering by sea U I
know Cyprus had been in talks and had
been pushing for a a corridor a
humanitarian Corridor via the sea
yeah so those talks are ongoing um we
haven't seen anything solidified yet uh
from the United Nations perspective we
will continue to pursue the reopening of
commercial Crossings and crossings so
that we are able to bring the trucks in
on a very very regular basis but I do
also again just want to emphasize it's
not just about getting things into Gaza
it's about what's happening inside of
Gaza that makes it absolutely impossible
for us to properly to deliver there are
not the conditions right now for the
United Nations and its Partners inside
of Gaza to be delivering humanitarian
assistance at the scale that is needed
but Lynn is that the main or only reason
why these talks are going on and on and
on I mean we're talking about more than
60 days of War
now yeah and so that's obviously another
thing humanitarian assistance is a
bandaid um again we're not supposed to
support the entire population what we
need is a ceasefire a release of all the
hostages and then ultimately a political
solution that seems very very far away
right now but it is up to the parties to
be able to find a political solution so
we can put an end to this is there any
more that the International Community
can do to Aid civilians uh to bring
about some sort of restraint uh when it
comes to not only uh uh what's going on
there in Gaza and what Hamas is doing
but also what Israel is
doing yeah so I have highlighted of
course what some of our obligations are
including Israel but all member states
do have an obligation they need to be
able to be speaking to the Waring
parties to try and come to some sort of
solution um so each of us have an
obligation and right now not many of
those obligations are being
filled right now it's a bit too early I
guess to be talking about this but at
some stage uh we will have to when
fighting comes to to an end what sort of
role do you see for the United Nations
in postwar
Gaza yeah there are so many opinions
right now and we see various officials
from the government of Israel some from
the Palestinian authori some from
various member states Etc so I'm not
going to be able to pronounce on that
one right now we'll have to see how that
works Lyn Hastings the un's humanitarian
coordinator for the Palestinian
territories
there